---
layout: news_item
title: 'Frida 15.1.15 Released'
date: 2022-02-01 00:46:40 +0100
author: oleavr
version: 15.1.15
categories: [release]
---

Quite a few exciting bits in this release. Let's dive right in.

## FreeBSD

Our ambition is to support all platforms that our users care about. In this
release I wanted to plant the first seed in expanding that to BSDs. So now I'm
thrilled to announce that Frida finally also supports FreeBSD! 🎉

For now we only support x86_64 and arm64, but expanding to the remaining
architectures is straight-forward in case anybody is interested in helping out.

The porting effort resulted in several architectural refinements and improved
robustness for ELF-based OSes in general. It also gave me some ideas on how to
improve our Linux injector to support injecting into containers, which is
something I'd like to do down the road.

## Stalker Performance

Back in 15.1.10, Stalker got a massive performance boost on x86/64. In this
release those same ideas have been applied to our arm64 backend. This includes
improved locality, better inline caches, etc. I'm told we were able to beat or
match QEMU in FuzzBench back then, and now we should be in good shape on arm64
as well. We also managed to improve stability while at it. Exciting!

## GObject Introspection

Back in 14.1, [@meme][] wired up build system support for
[GObject Introspection][]. This means we have a machine-readable description of
all of our APIs, which lets us piggyback on existing language [binding][]
infrastructure, and even get [auto-generated reference docs][] for free.

This release adds a lot of annotations and doc-strings to Gum, and we are now
closer than ever to having auto-generated reference docs. Still some work left
to do before it makes sense to publish the generated documentation, but it's not
far off. If anyone is interested in pitching in, check out Gum's [CI][] and have
a look at the warnings output by GObject Introspection.

## Meson subproject support

One thing I really like about the Meson build system is its support for
[subprojects][]. Gum now supports being used as a subproject. Some of you may
already be consuming Gum through its [devkit binaries][], and now you have a
brand new option that is even easier.

The main advantage over using a devkit is that everything is built from source,
so it's easy to experiment with the code.

Let's say we have a file `hello.c` that contains:

{% highlight c %}
#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include <dlfcn.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <gum.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>

static int (* open_impl) (const char * path, int oflag, ...);
static int replacement_open (const char * path, int oflag, ...);

int
main (int argc,
      char * argv[])
{
  gum_init ();

  GumInterceptor * interceptor = gum_interceptor_obtain ();

  gum_interceptor_begin_transaction (interceptor);

  open_impl = dlsym (RTLD_DEFAULT, "open");
  gum_interceptor_replace (interceptor, open_impl, replacement_open,
      NULL, NULL);

  gum_interceptor_end_transaction (interceptor);

  close (open_impl ("/etc/hosts", O_RDONLY));
  close (open_impl ("/etc/fstab", O_RDONLY));

  return 0;
}

static int
replacement_open (const char * path,
                  int oflag,
                  ...)
{
  printf ("!!! open(\"%s\", 0x%x)\n", path, oflag);

  return open_impl (path, oflag);
}
{% endhighlight %}

To build it we can create a `meson.build` next to it with the following:

{% highlight meson %}
project('hello', 'c')
gum = dependency('frida-gum-1.0')
executable('hello', 'hello.c', dependencies: [gum])
{% endhighlight %}

And create `subprojects/frida-gum.wrap` containing:

{% highlight ini %}
[wrap-git]
url = https://github.com/frida/frida-gum.git
revision = main
depth = 1

[provide]
dependency_names = frida-gum-1.0, frida-gum-heap-1.0, frida-gum-prof-1.0, frida-gumjs-1.0
{% endhighlight %}

In case you don't have Meson and Ninja already installed, run
`pip install meson ninja`.

Then, to build and run:

{% highlight sh %}
$ meson setup build
$ meson compile -C build
$ ./build/hello
!!! open("/etc/hosts", 0x0)
!!! open("/etc/fstab", 0x0)
{% endhighlight %}

## Footprint

We put a lot of effort into making sure that Frida can scale from desktops all
the way down to embedded systems. In this release I spent some time profiling
our binary footprint, and based on this I ended up making a slew of tweaks and
build options to reduce our footprint.

I was curious how small I could make a [Gum Hello World][] program that only
uses Interceptor. The end result was measured on 32-bit ARM w/ Thumb
instructions, where Gum and its dependencies are statically linked, and the only
external dependency is the system's libc.

The result was as small as 55K (!), and that made me really excited. What I did
was to introduce new build options in Gum, GLib, and Capstone. For Gum we now
support a "diet" mode where we don't make use of GObject and only offer a plain
C API. This means it won't support GObject Introspection and fancy language
bindings. It also means we don't offer the full Gum API, but that is something
that can be expanded on in the future.

Similarly for GLib there is also a new "diet" mode, and boils down to disabling
its slice allocator, debugging features, and a few other minor tweaks like that.

As for Capstone, I ended up introducing a new "profile" option that can be set
to "tiny". The result of doing so is that Capstone only understands enough of
the instruction set to determine each instruction's length, and provide some
details on position-dependent instructions. The idea is to only support what
our Relocator implementations need, as those do most of the heavy lifting
behind Interceptor and Stalker.

While I wouldn't recommend using these build options unless you really need a
footprint that small, it's good to be aware of what's possible. We also offer
other, less extreme options. Read more in our [footprint docs][].

## The curse of multiple build systems

Something that has been bothering me for as long as Frida has existed, is that
building Frida involves dealing with multiple build systems. While we do of
course try to hide that complexity behind scripts/makefiles, we are inevitably
going to have unhappy users who find themselves trying to figure out why Frida
is not building for them.

Some are also interested in cross-compiling Frida for a slightly different libc,
toolchain, or what have you. They may even be looking to add support for an OS
we don't yet support. Chances are that we're going to demotivate them the moment
they realize they need to deal with four different build-systems: Meson,
autotools, custom Perl scripts (OpenSSL), and GN (V8).

As we are happy users of Meson, my goal is to "Mesonify all the things!". With
this release, we have now finally reached the point where virtually all of our
required dependencies are built using Meson. The only exception is V8, but we
will hopefully also build that with Meson someday. (Spoiler from the future:
Frida 16 will get us there!)

## EOF

There's also a bunch of other exciting changes, so definitely check out the
changelog below.

Enjoy!

### Changelog

- Add support for FreeBSD.
- Add support for ARMv4, for instrumenting old embedded systems.
- Add build options for binary footprint reductions (see config.mk).
- Tweak Capstone and GLib to enable much smaller binary footprints.
- droidy: Add AXML decoder. Thanks [@meme][]!
- windows: Fix dbghelp backtracer support for libffi-frames.
- linux: Fix compatibility with new glibc versions.
- linux: Only use one frida-helper when assets are installed.
- qnx: Remove tempfiles when injector is closed.
- core: Plug leak when agent teardown is cancelled.
- gumjs: Fix handling of RPC invocations returning *null*.
- interceptor: Use a "jumbo"-JMP on x86 when needed, when impossible to allocate
  memory reachable from a "JMP <imm32>".
- interceptor: Generate variable size x86 NOP padding.
- stalker: Improve performance of the arm64 backend, by applying ideas recently
  used to optimize the x86/64 backend -- e.g. improved locality, better inline
  caches, etc.
- stalker: Fix handling of zero-sized freeze/thaw().
- stalker: Rework x86 PLT exclusion code to avoid reentrancy-issues during
  stalking.
- stalker: Don't require a C++ runtime to be present.
- arm-writer: Add put_bl_reg(), put_call_reg().
- arm-writer: Fix register clobbering in put_call_address*().
- arm64-reader: Expose disassemble_instruction_at().
- arm64-writer: Fix handling of mixed-width literals.
- arm64-writer: Fix TBZ/TBNZ encoding.
- arm64-writer: Fix put_and_reg_reg_imm() on 32-bit systems.
- arm64-writer: Add put_{ldr,str}_reg_reg_offset_mode().
- elf-module: Expose more details, add support for offline mode, add Vala
  bindings.
- exceptor: Add reset() for exception handler recovery.
- gum: Add lots of GObject Introspection annotations and API docs.
- gum: Add support for using as a Meson subproject.
- gum: Port Meson build system to Windows.
- gum: Eliminate the GIO dependency.
- gum: Add diet mode, allowing a "Hello World" C program that uses Interceptor
  to be as small as 55K on 32-bit ARM w/ Thumb instructions.
- gum: Add CI. Thanks [@meme][]!
- Improve build system with many portability improvements.
- Build elfutils, libiconv, libdwarf, libunwind, openssl, xz with Meson.
- Upgrade dependencies: capstone, elfutils, libdwarf, libunwind.
- Release packages for Fedora 35 instead of 34.
- python: Use PEP 503 instead of PyPI xmlrpc. Thanks [@GalaxySnail][]!
- python: Fix support for Python >= 3.10 on Windows.


[GObject Introspection]: https://gi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
[binding]: https://gi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users.html
[auto-generated reference docs]: https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gi-docgen/
[CI]: https://github.com/frida/frida-gum/actions
[subprojects]: https://mesonbuild.com/Subprojects.html
[devkit binaries]: https://github.com/frida/frida/releases
[Gum Hello World]: https://github.com/oleavr/hello-gum
[footprint docs]: /docs/footprint/
[@meme]: https://github.com/meme
[@GalaxySnail]: https://github.com/GalaxySnail
