---
layout: news_item
title: 'Frida 15.1.18 Released'
date: 2022-05-04 19:43:52 +0200
author: oleavr
version: 15.1.18
categories: [release]
---

Lots of improvements all over the place this time. Many stability improvements.

I have continued improving our CI and build system infrastructure. QNX and MIPS
support are back from the dead, after long-standing regressions. These went
unnoticed due to lack of CI coverage. We now have CI in place to ensure that
won't happen again.

Do check out the changelog below for a full overview of what's new.

Enjoy!

### Changelog

- gadget: Fix deadlock when Gadget is blocking the dynamic linker with its
  internal lock(s) held while waiting for resume(). In that case we are
  processing the JS MainContext while blocking, with network I/O handled by the
  Gadget thread. Because Stalker may interact with the dynamic linker during its
  class_init(), we must ensure that it happens from the JS thread and not the
  network I/O thread.
- exit-monitor: Fix deadlock when a fork() goes unnoticed.
- darwin: Skip pseudo-signing when running on Corellium.
- darwin: Fix compatibility with older iOS SDKs.
- darwin-backtracer: Fix loop variable wrap-around.
- darwin-mapper: Fix footprint budgeting w/ chained fixups.
- linux: Fix the Process.modify_thread() wait logic.
- linux: Fully resolve libc on modern glibc systems.
- linux: Remove the Linjector cleanup delay.
- ios: Add config.mk option for building without jailbreak support code, for
  compatibility with e.g. TestFlight.
- ios: Eliminate dependency on external Mach VM header.
- android: Fix unw_getcontext() on Android/x86, which resulted in stack
  corruption during e.g. Thread.backtrace().
- freebsd: Add BSDmakefile for convenience.
- freebsd: Fix gum_clear_cache() reliability.
- freebsd: Improve the program path query API.
- freebsd: Try a bit harder when MAP_32BIT fails.
- mips: Fix long-standing regressions that went unnoticed due to lack of CI.
- qnx: Fix long-standing regressions that went unnoticed due to lack of CI. Also
  improve the QNX backend while at it.
- posix: Use posix_madvise() if madvise() is unavailable.
- stalker: Detect thread exit implementation on glibc, Android, and FreeBSD.
- stalker: Fix Linux clone() support in the x86 backend.
- stalker: Fix backpatching of JECXZ/JRCXZ x86 instructions.
- stalker: Fix two *pc* vs *code* mixups in the x86 backend.
- stalker: Optimize Linux syscall logic in the x86 backend.
- stalker: Move unwind support behind an API.
- stalker: Simplify and fix the x86 unwind Interceptor logic.
- stalker: Implement unwind hooking in the arm64 backend. Thanks [@s1341][]!
- stalker: Add backpatch query support.
- stalker: Add support for recompiling blocks.
- process: Add resolve_module_pointer().
- elf-module: Improve the DT_SYMTAB entry count detection.
- elf-module: Skip symbols with a dangling name reference.
- symbolutil-libdwarf: Add support for DWARF v5.
- libdwarf: Backport upstream fix for handling of DW_FORM_line_strp.
- dbghelp-backtracer: Improve reliability on 32-bit x86.
- arm-relocator: Simplify PC-relative *LDR* handling.
- arm-writer: Add call_reg_with_arguments*().
- arm-writer: Handle put_call*() w/ more than four args.
- thumb-writer: Handle put_call*() stack alignment.
- arm64-writer: Optimize *LDR reg, #0*.
- x86-relocator: Add *input_pc* to support offline use.
- x86-relocator: Fix PC vs output mixup in RIP-relative fast-path.
- x86-relocator: Improve the RIP offset fixup logic.
- bounds-checker: Fall back to the matching heap API.
- gumjs: Fix CModule memory allocation logic.
- gumjs: Fix CModule runtime with internal TinyCC.
- gumjs: Lower build-time Python requirement to 3.7.
- heap-api: Improve libc detection on non-Windows OSes.
- heap-api: Include static MSVC CRT APIs in the list.
- gum: Improve Meson build system to support MSVC.
- gum: Improve Gum vapis to expose more APIs.
- core: Fix build failure with some locales by switching off localization when
  invoking tools from modulate.py.
- python: Fix stability issue caused by incorrect refcounting in
  get_max_argument_count().
- python: Fix get_index_url_from_pip(). Thanks [@X5tar][]!
- python: Fix index URL retrieval on Python < 3.6. Thanks [@serfend][]!
- node: Publish prebuilds for Electron 18 instead of 16.
- ci: Add Linux/MIPS, FreeBSD/x86_64, FreeBSD/arm64, and QNX/armeabi. For Gum,
  also add Windows/x86_64, macOS/x86_64, Linux/x86, Linux/x86_64, iOS/arm64,
  Android/x86, Android/arm, and Android/arm64.


[@s1341]: https://github.com/s1341
[@X5tar]: https://github.com/X5tar
[@serfend]: https://github.com/serfend
