---
layout: news_item
title: 'Frida 16.1.11 Released'
date: 2024-01-12 15:13:16 +0100
author: oleavr
version: 16.1.11
categories: [release]
---

Lots of goodies this time around:

- stalker: Improve stability on multiple fronts. Kudos to [@as0ler][],
  [@hsorbo][], and [@mrmacete][] for the fun and productive mob programming
  sessions that resulted in these wonderful improvements:
  - stalker: Copy BLR for excluded calls on arm64, instead of replacing them with
    functionally-equivalent ones, so that any pointer authentication context is
    used as expected. Thanks [@mrmacete][]!
  - stalker: Abort when allocate_near() fails on arm64, instead of crashing due
    to the subsequent NULL pointer dereference.
  - gumjs: Fix crash in Stalker.flush() on a stopped sink. This happens if
    Stalker.garbageCollect() was just called.
  - gumjs: Fix use-after-free in Stalker QuickJS callback logic. We need to keep
    the callback values alive in case Stalker.garbageCollect() happens in the
    middle and releases them.
- darwin: Improve symbolicator cache invalidator logic. Thanks [@mrmacete][]!
- swift-api-resolver: Handle signed pointers.
- linux: Improve spawn() to handle partial link maps.
- linux: Improve injector to handle XOM pages.
- linux: Improve injector RTLD API detection.
- linux: Fix injector ELF SYMTAB name parsing.
- node: Link against the inspector library on UNIX, to fix RTLD panic when
  Script#enableDebugger() is called. Thanks [@pandasauce][]!
- ci: Publish FreeBSD prebuilds for Node.js 20 and Electron 27.


[@as0ler]: https://twitter.com/as0ler
[@hsorbo]: https://twitter.com/hsorbo
[@mrmacete]: https://twitter.com/bezjaje
[@pandasauce]: https://github.com/pandasauce
