---
layout: news_item
title: 'Frida 16.5.3 Released'
date: 2024-10-10 20:18:36 +0200
author: oleavr
version: 16.5.3
categories: [release]
---

Excited to bring you another bug-fix release to further improve our Fruity
backend, iOS stability, and a fix for memory scanning with regexes.

The changes mentioned without specific attribution were authored by [@hsorbo][]
and I in a series of fun pair-programming sessions.

Here's the long and short of it:

- memory: Make memory scanning regex patterns raw, so searches are reliable
  across binary regions that are not valid UTF-8. Thanks [@mrmacete][]!
- web-service: Close connections of removed dynamic interfaces, to avoid them
  sticking around until we run out of file-descriptors.
- network-stack: Handle abrupt disposal of TcpConnection, where we would free
  the TCP PCB but fail to notify any live TcpIOSource instances and blocked
  TcpInputStream.read() calls.
- network-stack: Fix racy TCP data loss upon peer closure, where the closure
  resulted in us letting go of the PCB, and the recv() logic would return early
  because the PCB was gone. At that point there might still be data left in the
  RX buffer, but the application wouldn't see it.
- network-stack: Fix race in TcpInputStream.read(), where the notify::pending-io
  signal fires after the call to is_readable() but before our signal handler is
  connected.
- fruity: Use USB product string as transport name.
- fruity: Fix USB mode parsing on iOS < 16, where the mode is a 3 byte blob.
- fruity: Bubble up USB permission errors.
- fruity: Bail on iOS tunnel service versions pre-17, instead of crashing.
- control-service: Fix reliability on CoreDevice systems, where having a single
  transport broker listening on all interfaces may result in an early TCP RST
  when trying to communicate with it from inside a tunnel. The exact cause of
  this is not known, but we have confirmed that having one broker per dynamic
  interface/tunnel does resolve the issue. We also observed that listening on
  all interfaces, but restricted to IPv6, also avoids the issue.
- meson: Fix i/tvOS compilation with GLib as a subproject.
- meson: Disable Fruity and friends on FreeBSD, as we now rely on a libusb API
  that only exists in our libusb. If anyone's interested in these backends on
  FreeBSD it shouldn't be too hard to fix this -- PRs are most welcome.


[@mrmacete]: https://twitter.com/bezjaje
