---
layout: news_item
title: 'Frida 17.2.14 Released'
date: 2025-07-24 11:16:55 +0200
author: oleavr
version: 17.2.14
categories: [release]
---

This release brings several improvements to the Cloak API and module handling,
along with some essential updates and bug fixes. A special shout-out to
[@AeonLucid][] for contributing to the Android support.

- **android:** Updated `frida-java-bridge` in `system-server` to include the
  improved ART offset lookup by [@AeonLucid][]. See [frida-java-bridge#362][]
  for details.

- **cloak:** Added support for `Art::GetOsThreadStat` on Android, addressing an
  issue similar to [frida-core#500][], where Zygote waits for the process to
  become single-threaded before continuing, otherwise it crashes. This change
  accommodates the new usage of `art::GetOsThreadStat`. (Thanks to
  [@AeonLucid][])

- **cloak:** Plugged a memory leak in `ThreadCountCloaker.dispose()`, where we
  were failing to chain up to `GObject.dispose()`.

- **module:** Added an optional `get_version()` virtual function.

- **module:** Made most interface methods optional to reduce the amount of
  boilerplate required for Barebone integrations.

- **darwin:** Implemented `Module.get_version()`, exposing the
  `LC_SOURCE_VERSION` when available.

- **darwin-module:** Added `source-version` property to expose
  `LC_SOURCE_VERSION` if present.

- **darwin-module:** Added support for non-Darwin in-memory usage, e.g., inside
  XNU.

- **gumjs:** Exposed `Module#version` to JavaScript.

- **barebone:** Added support for registering modules.

- **compiler:** Bumped `@types/frida-gum` to 19.0.1.


[@AeonLucid]: https://x.com/AeonLucid
[frida-java-bridge#362]: https://github.com/frida/frida-java-bridge/pull/362
[frida-core#500]: https://github.com/frida/frida-core/issues/500
